# Metadata v3 Automation Policy

The use of LLMs by authors to analyse and fix bugs in CPAN modules has been increasing in the past year.
It has enabled maintainers to quickly address a large number of outstanding issues.

However, the use of these tools is controversial.
Many distributors and end-users have concerns about code quality and security,
as well as ethical, environmental, legal and political effects of the technology.

In recent cases, there was a mistaken impression that some authors
were allowing AI agents to review AI-generated PRs, merge them without
human intervention.  Some Linux distributions have expressed security
concerns about modules that they believed were modified and released without
human intervention.

There has also been a case where a module was updated from an external data source and a new release uploaded automatically from an author who was deceased [4].

This risks eroding trust in the modules and CPAN.

A response has been for authors to add an `AI_POLICY.md` to their distributions,
or outline AI policies in the `CONTRIBUTING.md` documentation.

There is a need for a machine-readablle document to indicates how authors and contributors use automated tools in a standard way.
Specifically, we need to outline permissions for
1. data mining (the use and analysis of a distribution's code and documentation);
2. code generation (how the code and documentation is updated);
3. machione contributions (what actions can be automated by the contributors);
4. automated actions (what actions are automated by the maintainers);

This data is saved in the metadata directory in a file called `automation-policy.json`,
and can be used for generating `AI_POLICY.md` documentation.

### Data Mining

This outlines the authors' preference for a distribution can be used by automated systems.

We can take inspiration from IPTC Data Mining metadata [1] [2].
However, specifying author preferences is problematic:

- An option to prohibit all forms of data mining would prohibit indexing by CPAN,
  which makes no sense for a software repository.

- An option to prohibit analysis of distributions conflicts with the needs of CPAN
  to scan distributions for conformance to "kwalitee" standards, and to scan them
  for malware or analyse them for vulnerabilities.

- Most open source licenses do not specifically prohibit analysis or training.

- There is also no enforcement mechanism for this preference in MetaCPAN or software repositories like GitHub.

Therefore, there will not be a means of expressing this version of the metadata.

### Code Generation

This outlines how automated tools will generate or update the code and documentation.

This is a hierarchy. Only one value may be chosen.

Note that there is no "none" option because distributions where everything is hand-written are rare.

#### toolchain

This means that any code changes are made by the standard tools only, e.g. generation of `META.json`, `README`, updates to the POD or incrementing the code as part of the build and release process.

It implicitly includes dynamic code made by frameworks such as Moose, DBIx::Class or by curried methods.

No generative AI is used in this process.

#### external_sources

Code is generated or updated from external sources, e.g. the Olson timezone database, or schema data from schema.org.

This includes simply copying data files to be used via something like Fire::ShareDir by an otherwise unchanged module.

#### machine_generated

Some of the code has been generated by AI agents.

### Automated Contributions

This refers to automated contributions from entities that are not controlled by or explicitly granted access by the maintainers,
e.g. a bot run by a third party identifies a bug and submits a report to the distribution.

Note that it is up to the maintainers to decide on rate limits to contributions,
and how exceeding permissions or rate limits will be handled.

This is a hierarchy of permissions. Only one value may be chosen.

#### none

Machine-generated contributions will not be accepted.
This includes contributions cut-and-pasted by a person from another source.

#### comment

Agents are allowed to post comments on existing issues or pull requests.

#### issues

Agents may create issues or submit security vulnerability reports.

#### issues

Agents may create issues or submit security vulnerability reports.

#### code_request

Agents may submit patches or pull requests without human intervention.

### Automated Actions

#### none

There is no automation, not even simple scripts like GitHub actions.

#### comment

Basic scripted actions (e.g. github actions) which may analyse and comment on issues or PRs.
These may not require human moderation.

#### issue

Automated tools can create, modify or close issues.
These may not require human moderation.

#### code_request

Automated tools can create/update pull requests, but not merge on their own.
These may not require human moderation.

#### code_change

Automated tools can merge patches or pull requests.
These may not require human moderation.

#### release

Automated tools can create and upload releases without human intervention

### Metadata

The JSON schema for the automation policy is
```json
{
  "$schema": "https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/schema",
  "$id": "TODO/automation-policy.json",
  "title": "Automation Policy",
  "description": "Automation Policy",
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {

    "version": {
      "description": "The version of the automation policy schema",
      "type": "integer",
    },

    "distribution": {
       "description": "An optional name of the software distribution that this applies to",
       "type": "string"
    },

    "description": {
      "description": "An optional description of this policy",
      "type": "string"
    },

    "document": {
      "description": "The path of an AI_POLICY document",
      "type": "string"
    },

    "code_generation": {
      "description": "A level of how automated systems may change the code or documentation",
      "enum": [ "toolchain", "external_sources", "machine_generated" ]
    },

    "automated_contributions": {
      "description": "A level of how non-maintainers may submit automated contributions",
      "enum": [ "none", "comment", "issue", "code_request" ]
    },

    "automated_actions": {
      "description": "A level of how maintainers may use automated changes",
      "enum": [ "none", "comment", "issue", "code_request", "code_change", "release" ]
    }
  },
  "required": [ "version", "code_generation", "automated_contributions", "automated_actions" ]
}

```


## Common Templates

### no automation

```json
{
  "version": 1,
  "code_generation": "toolchain",
  "automated_contributions": "none",
  "automated_actions": "comment"
}

```

### issues only

The maintainers may accept submissions of bug and vulnerability reports from automated tools,
but not allow code change requests.

```json
{
  "version": 1,
  "code_generation": "toolchain",
  "automated_contributions": "issues",
  "automated_actions": "issues"
}

```

### human supervised


```json
{
  "version": 1,
  "code_generation": "machine_generated",
  "automated_contributions": "code_request",
  "automated_actions": "code_request"
}
```


### data_driven_updates

A use case for this is a cron job that checks for an updated external
database, adapts the data into a new version of a module, and uploads
a new release to CPAN.


```json
{
  "version": 1,
  "code_generation": "external_sources",
  "automated_contributions": "issue",
  "automated_actions": "release"
}
```

### full_automation

This is discouraged.

```json
{
  "version": 1,
  "code_generation": "code_generation",
  "automated_contributions": "code_request",
  "automated_actions": "release"
}
```

## References


[1] https://www.iptc.org/std/photometadata/specification/IPTC-PhotoMetadata-2025.1.html#data-mining

[2] https://www.iptc.org/std/photometadata/documentation/userguide/#_data_mining

[3] https://iptc.org/news/iptc-releases-draft-of-digital-source-type-vocabulary-to-support-synthetic-media/

[4] https://www.nntp.perl.org/group/perl.modules/2025/03/msg105785.html